---
layout: post
title: Reflection after two years in Sillicon Valley
author: Chris
date: '2019-11-22 1:49:00 -0800'
category: Personal
summary: Testing summary
thumbnail: nighttime_SF_bridge.jpg
permalink: /blog/leaving-the-bay
---

Let me set the stage for this post as this post is being written a little over two years into my professional career and there's certainly some prefacing that needs to happen. Growing up in the Dallas, TX area with an interest in computers I had always heard that being a software developer was a good financial decision. However, that wasn't what really brought me down this path. A combination of liking video games and finding solace in coding for hours at a time resulted in this path. I was fortunate enough to have both a Java and Web Design class in my high school. I joined extracurriculars that let me build things with this skillset, and the interest just kept building from there. I played around with software like nmap, wireshark, metasploit, etc. (I was what many would refer to as a script kiddie). I enjoyed understanding how these types of software were working from a fundamental perspective. Once college started I defaulted to specializing in Network Security for my Bachelors because of my previous interest. Although, I did end up enjoying the classes that came with that specialization I found the knowledge more supplemental than indicative of future career interests. During my time in college I held two internships one at L3 in Texas and another at Intel's Autonomous Driving Group in Oregon. It's after the Intel internship that I was given the opportunity to take a full time position for the same autonomous driving team, but in San Jose, California. To be honest, I was never the type of kid to desparately want to leave his hometown come Highschool graduation time cause it wasn't the practical choice. I always viewed a degree as a means of getting fundamental knowledge for my career, but not a determining factor in my career given how many people in my particular industry excel either without a degree or from lesser known universities. That being said it's certainly best to get a good foundation in Computer Science when embarking in this career path so I simply picked the most practical decision which was UTDallas. A young university with a solid Computer Science program, connections to local tech companies, and most importantly a very generous scholarship giver. I was able to graduate debt-free which played a big role in my adult life, but that's probably a post for another day. When the decision of going to Sillicon Valley came up for my first career step I was excited mostly for the opportunity to work in the autonomous driving space. So much so that I honestly neglected any idea of negotiating my starting salary and hence started with what I would argue is very low for the area. I won't give specific numbers, but to put things in perspective my colleagues in Texas had a starting salary with local Dallas companies that was equivalent or slightly higher than my own. 

The Bay Area has an intoxicating energy around Tech. In other areas people don't talk about technology, but the few times they do it's based off the latest thing on the news. You'd get people saying things like autonomous driving is decades away, commercial space travel is even further. While in the Bay people can count on one hand the amount of years it would take to make either happen. I think this is fundamentally rooted in just how truly achievable we think all of this is. The technology has existed, we're just now getting to the point where we're turning it into a product/industry. We have a fundamental skillset for creating new things that have never existed in the world. Pair that with good design, and a good go-to-market strategy and you have never before seen industries. We've seen it done so many times here that we innately believe it, and that is contagious in the best of ways. We have companies that have good engineering weaved so deeply into their DNA that they can attract the best engineers in the world, and pay them accordingly. If you were to ask for Bay Area level of pay for software development anywhere other than NY or Seattle (and even then it has to be at one of these top name companies) then you'd likely get ghosted during the interview process. Other companies simply don't see the same value in their engineers, and I believe it has to do with their inability to see the value in good engineering. Good engineering leads to good products, good products can literally make or break companies. Tech companies can reach Unicorn status on a single product, and engineers are capable of building it. Good engineering is worth every penny. As an engineer who is just now figuring out my worth, I can't stress how important it is for others to work at least once in a truly engineering focused company. It's an apples to potatoes comparison to other companies that simply don't value you as much. I also firmly believe engineering focused companies aren't for everyone, there are benefits to non-engineering focused companies. Benefits like more management than technical upward mobility, and more opportunity for ownership. Contrary to popular belief, I think good work life balance is a hit or miss at every company, but there do exist companies whose culture promotes a more ambitious work life. After speaking with engineers in the Bay I also realize that much of the stereotyping around big name companies (Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Google, Netflix, Microsot, etc.) is just that, stereotyping. Yes, their cultures vary and thus make some aspects of the stereotype highly likely. However, none of these stereotypes are guaranteed because every team, every manager, every product, every teammate presents a variable that simply can't be accounted for and can impact your experience. It has taken me quite some time to realize what I value as a software developer and I'm certain there's much more left for me to learn about myself. I think that's what most developers should seek to do in their early career, is try to understand both the conditions they work best in as well as the type of work they enjoy. With every position try to understand this better. As long as you keep guessing and checking once you know what you have could be better, you'll inevitably get to where you want to go. For example, so far I've learned I am the type of person who can notice both potential of a product as well as potential problems with process and product pretty quickly, so my expectation is that the company/project/team I work for should has a process and team in place for these things to be addressed. I can get excited and energized about the future of my work so much so that I can easily become a chief evangelist. In order to do that I need to understand adjacent products, the initial problem that lead to the product being made in the first place, and have a means of understanding the customer's problem. When I don't have access to this information, or my ideas for the future of the product/problems I notice fall upon deaf ears I feel stagnant, almost like I'm falling behind in my personal growth. Or quite simply, as if my hands are tied. With that comes the slow death of my excitement and the growing disinterest in the product as I no longer feel ownership in any kind of capacity. I've also learned I thoroughly enjoy system design, as well as much of the full-stack (front-end web technologies and backend/infrastructure implementation). I believe my technical interests are rooted in my desire to be able to create a full product end-to-end. I enjoy the intricacies of a good user-friendly layout just as much as I enjoy creating database schemas for the desired post-processing operations. At this time in my career I've gotten enough experience with front-end that I am starting to focus on infrastructure and system-design positions. However, as comfortable as I am with the above statements I would still say I'm in a guess-and-check phase of my career. I truly don't know if my full-stack interests will hold true forever. I have no idea how long I want to be a developer before I move on to a technical manager type of role. For now I definitely can't imagine not programming and working hands-on with technology as this is the way in which I stay up to date with the latest technologies. So if I were to move to such a role where I wouldn't get my hands dirty I think I would have to develop some kind of process of staying in-sync with the pulse of the tech industry. I think I may run into problems with that still as I am very much a hands-on learner, but I'll cross that bridge when it comes. At this time my understanding of the tech industry is there really isn't a "full-stack" specialization. My limited understanding is that although there are generic categories of developers (front-end, back-end, full-stack) there are more niche roles like Android/iOS developers, Machine Learning Engineer (which even within it has specializations), Graphics engineers (which also has specializations within it), Security Engineer, etc. The list goes on, and all of these titles hone in on work that is more specific than the generic domain of Software Engineering. That is currently what I'm working to understand, is there a more niche role within the full-stack domain that I would like to specialize in. In theory, there's nothing inherently wrong with not specializing. I simply want to be certain I'm not missing out on a hidden interest/talent of mine. However, as time progresses I do think my "specialization" may be less of a tech-stack specialization and more of an industry one. The behavior that I'm noticing in myself is that the majority of my excitement for my job comes from what I'm creating for the end-user, and less about how it is made. I think technology is just a tool for creating products/services, but the true value comes from providing something so highly desired to the end customer that it can't help but become a verb. 

My advice to other developers that are just starting their journey is to turn your jobs into experiments, and take the time to reflect on what you learn about yourself during that job at least on a yearly basis. Don't be afraid to change jobs especially in the beginning of your career. It's absurd to assume your first job ever will be the perfect job for you. Although possible, in my opinion there is a higher chance that it is not the best company or project for your desired career. We simple have no frame of reference coming out of college to understand the type of work and work conditions we prefer. We also are in a weak position for negotiating for the ideal position, we tend to graduate with debt that we need to start paying off, etc. There's no shortage of reasons why it's unlikely you'll guess right the first time and that's perfectly OK! Just listen to your heart, cause it somehow already knows where you're meant to be.
